Clean up text for second half of DE instruction notebook (#600)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: scRNA-seq-advanced/04-differential_expression.Rmd

## Differential Expression Analysis

Now we are ready to start preparing for our DE analysis, where we will compare the gene expression of all cells annotated as `Tumor_Myoblasts` in 3 ARMS samples to 3 ERMS samples.

Throughout the notebook we have been working with an integrated dataset that contains corrected gene expression data and a corrected UMAP.
However, we do not want to use corrected gene expression values for differential expression, we want to use the original raw counts that are present in the `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object. 
It is advised to only use the corrected values for any analyses being performed at the cell level, e.g. dimensionality reduction.

> In contrast, it is not advised to use corrected values for any analyses that are gene-based, such as differential expression or marker gene detection, because within-batch and between-batch gene expression differences are no longer preserved.

Reviewer: I think we should link this chapter here - http://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.multisample/using-corrected-values.html
The Background section has a decent explanation.

### Pseudo-bulking 

Before we can compare the gene expression profiles of myoblasts in ARMS vs. ERMS samples, we will need to "pseudo-bulk" the gene counts. 
Pseudo-bulking creates a new counts matrix that contains the total counts across all cells of a given label (e.g. cell type) for each sample ([Tung _et al.,_ 2017](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39921)). 
If each gene had counts from every cell, then each cell would be counted as its own replicate and we would inflate our p-values.
By pseudo-bulking first, each gene will now have one value for each sample and we can utilize the same methods we would use if we were performing bulk RNA-seq.

Pseudo-bulking is implemented prior to differential expression analysis on single-cell data for the following reasons: 

- Produces larger counts, which allows us to use standard normalization and differential expression methods used by bulk RNA-seq. 
- Collapses gene expression counts by sample, so that samples, rather than cells, represent replicates.

> - Masks variance within a sample to emphasize variance across samples.

Reviewer: +1!

> When we pseudo-bulk we want to produce a new counts matrix that has all genes and condenses all cells to include one group for each combination of cell type and sample.

Reviewer: Agreed.

> Psuedo-bulking will create a new SCE object with new dimensions that contain only the pseudo-bulked counts for all genes. 
> We can then subset this SCE to just include our cell type of interest (tumor myoblasts) for input to the DE analysis. 

Reviewer: "with new dimensions" sort of sounds like we're adding more reduced dimensions, a thing we often do but are extremely not doing here. 
Again, not necessarily tied to this suggestion but I think it could it to be a bit more explicit in some way.

```suggestion
Psuedo-bulking will create a new SCE object that contains only the pseudo-bulked counts for all genes across all _samples_, rather than across all cells.
We can then subset this SCE to just include our cell type of interest (tumor myoblasts) for input to the DE analysis. 
```

## Differential Expression Analysis

Now we are ready to start preparing for our DE analysis, where we will compare the gene expression of all cells annotated as `Tumor_Myoblasts` in 3 ARMS samples to 3 ERMS samples.

Throughout the notebook we have been working with an integrated dataset that contains corrected gene expression data and a corrected UMAP.
However, we do not want to use corrected gene expression values for differential expression, we want to use the original raw counts that are present in the `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object. 
It is advised to only use the corrected values for any analyses being performed at the cell level, e.g. dimensionality reduction.
In contrast, it is not advised to use corrected values for any analyses that are gene-based, such as differential expression or marker gene detection, because within-batch and between-batch gene expression differences are no longer preserved.

> See the [OSCA chapter on Using the corrected values](http://bioconductor.org/books/3.15/OSCA.multisample/using-corrected-values.html#using-corrected-values) for more insight.

Reviewer: I want to note that I've been linking version `3.16`. Should we all sync up here?

Author: I'm going to change to `3.16` for the links present in this notebook.

For the remainder of the DE analysis we will be using data found in the integrated object that has been uncorrected. 

> As a reminder, the uncorrected gene expression data, in the `counts` and `logcounts` assays, correspond to data that has been merged (the first step we walked through prior to integration) but has not been corrected.

Reviewer: The phrasing feels a but weird to say "the uncorrected data are the data that has not been corrected".. I'm not necessarily sure I've suggested better phrasing though!

```suggestion
As a reminder, the uncorrected gene expression data, found in the `counts` and `logcounts` assays, correspond to data that has been merged (the first step we walked through prior to integration) into the same SCE but not yet integrated.
```

### Pseudo-bulking 

Before we can compare the gene expression profiles of myoblasts in ARMS vs. ERMS samples, we will need to "pseudo-bulk" the gene counts. 
Pseudo-bulking creates a new counts matrix that contains the sum of the counts from all cells with a given label (e.g., cell type) for each sample ([Tung _et al._, 2017](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39921)). 
If we were to keep each cell's counts separate, treating them as replicate samples, we would end up with inflated statistics. 
By pseudo-bulking first, will now have one count for each gene for each sample and we can take advantage of well-established methods for differential expression with bulk RNA-seq.

Pseudo-bulking is implemented prior to differential expression analysis on single-cell data for the following reasons: 

- Produces larger and less sparse counts, which allows us to use standard normalization and differential expression methods used by bulk RNA-seq. 
- Collapses gene expression counts by sample, so that samples, rather than cells, represent replicates.
- Masks variance within a sample to emphasize variance across samples.
This can be both good and bad! 

> Genes that are homogeneous across a sample are more likely to be identified as differentially expressed, while genes with high intra-sample heterogeneity will have a weaker signal.

Author: Yes your example totally makes sense! I was thinking more along the lines if you have a gene that's uniformly up or down across cells then generally that would result in a stronger signal, whereas variation in your sample, even if just a small amount, will result in a weaker signal. Taking this from some of the explanation in the third bullet under the pseudo-bulking section of OSCA: http://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.multisample/multi-sample-comparisons.html#creating-pseudo-bulk-samples

I'll update this to be more clear about what is meant by homogeneous.

> Genes that are homogeneous across a sample are more likely to be identified as differentially expressed, while genes with high intra-sample heterogeneity will have a weaker signal.

Author: I ended up removing the comment about homogeneous genes and reworded to emphasize that you would miss genes with intra-sample heterogeneous in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/600/commits/ee2e73be65cf5a9fb1dd99f94bd9eed5fe773485 (and added in the missing chunk labels there too). Let me know what you think.

> Genes that are homogeneous across a sample are more likely to be identified as differentially expressed, while genes with high intra-sample heterogeneity will have a weaker signal.

Reviewer 2: I kind of partially disagree with part of their statement here, which is the point I was trying to get across: 

> Masking is generally desirable as DEGs - unlike marker genes - do not need to have low within-sample variance to be interesting, e.g., if the treatment effect is consistent across replicate populations but heterogeneous on a per-cell basis.

The part I disagree with is the implicit assumption that not knowing about heterogeneous cell expression is just fine. I kind of think it is worth knowing, and a model that ignores it seems weaker to me. But this is really subtle, and probably not worth the effort to try to get across in a short sentence. 

Maybe something like this? Or maybe just ignore it... This might be a thing for a slide where illustration of the point is easier.

```
Masking intra-sample variation means you might miss identifying genes where average expression doesn't change between samples but the degree of cell-to-cell variation does.
```

Before we apply pseudo-bulking to our dataset, let's look at a simple example of how pseudo-bulking works. 

```{r create matrix}
# create an example counts matrix
counts_mtx <- matrix(
  1:12, 
  ncol = 4,
  dimnames = list(c("geneA", "geneB", "geneC"),
                  c("A-cell1", "A-cell2", "B-cell1", "B-cell2"))

>   )

Reviewer 2: Minor formatting
```suggestion
)
```

Now the actual pseudo-bulking for our dataset! 

We will use the [`aggregateAcrossCells()`function from the `scuttle` package](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/scuttle/man/aggregateAcrossCells.html) to pseudo-bulk our dataset.
This function takes as input an SCE object and the grouping assignments for each cell.
The output will be an SCE object that contains only the pseudo-bulked counts for all genes across all specified groups, rather than across all cells. 
We can then subset this SCE to just include our cell type of interest (tumor myoblasts) for input to the DE analysis. 

We can pseudo-bulk using any grouping that we are interested in.
For right now, we are interested in looking at gene expression across cell types, so we want to group the pseudo-bulked counts matrix by both cell type and original sample. 

```{r pseudobulk sce}
# first subset the coldata 
# to only have the columns we care about for pseudo-bulking 
pb_groups <- colData(rms_sce)[, c("celltype_broad", "sample")]

# create a new SCE object that contains 
# the pseudo-bulked counts across the provided groups 

> pb_sce <- scuttle::aggregateAcrossCells(rms_sce, 
>                                                   id = pb_groups)

Reviewer 2: spacing
```suggestion
pb_sce <- scuttle::aggregateAcrossCells(rms_sce, 
                                        id = pb_groups)
```

# column names aren't automatically added to the pseudo-bulked sce, 
# so let's add them in 
colnames(pb_sce) <- glue::glue(

>   "{pb_sce$celltype_broad}_{pb_sce$sample}"
>   )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "{pb_sce$celltype_broad}_{pb_sce$sample}"
)
```

```{r print dim}
# print out dimensions of unfiltered pseudobulk sce
dim(pb_sce)

# dimensions of filtered pseudobulk sce 
dim(filter_pb_sce)
```

It looks like we only got rid of one group.
We can do a quick check to see which group was removed by finding which column is no longer present in the filtered object.

```{r removed columns}
# find removed columns
removed_cols <- !colnames(pb_sce) %in% colnames(filter_pb_sce)

# print out missing columns
colnames(pb_sce)[removed_cols]
```

The last step we want to do to prepare our dataset for DE is to subset the pseudo-bulked SCE object to contain only the cell type that we are interested in comparing across the two RMS subtypes.
As mentioned previously, we are specifically interested in the `Tumor_Myoblast` cell type.

```{r filter celltype}
myoblast_cells <- filter_pb_sce$celltype_broad == "Tumor_Myoblast"

# create a new sce with only the tumor myoblasts
tumor_myoblast_sce <- filter_pb_sce[, myoblast_cells]
```

After filtering for our cell type of interest we should have a dataset with 6 columns, 1 for each group of `Tumor_Myoblast` cells in each of our 6 samples.

### Perform differential expression with DESeq2

> Now we will use the `DESeq2` package to perform DE analysis on our pseudo-bulked SCE object.

Reviewer 2: Probably not needed, but we might as well spell it out again
```suggestion
Now we will use the `DESeq2` package to perform differential expression (DE) analysis on our pseudo-bulked SCE object.
```

From this point, we can proceed in the same way we would if we had a bulk RNA-seq dataset with 6 samples.
We will start with the unnormalized raw counts in the `counts` assay of the pseudo-bulked SCE and do the following with `DESeq2`:

- Create a `DESeq` object
- Normalize and log transform the counts data
- Estimate dispersions and shrink estimates
- Fit a negative binomial model and perform hypothesis testing using Wald statistics

You can also refer to our [materials from our previous workshops covering bulk RNA-seq](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/tree/master/RNA-seq#readme) for more information on using `DESeq`.

#### Create the `DESeq2` object

> To create the `DESeq2` object we will need the unnormalized counts matrix, the metadata associated with the samples, and a design formula. 

Reviewer 2: Adding a bit more detail about why we are using the sce object here.
```suggestion
To create the `DESeq2` object we will need the unnormalized counts matrix, the metadata associated with the samples, and a design formula.
The first two items are already stored in our SCE object, so we can create a DESeq2 object directly from that object using the `DESeqDataSet()` function.
```

The design formula is used to indicate which columns of the metadata need to be considered in the DE comparison.
For our experiment we are comparing gene expression between different RMS subtypes.
The subtype information is stored in the `diagnosis_group` column of the `colData` in the pseudo-bulked SCE.

```{r deseq object}
# set up the deseq object 
deseq_object <- DESeq2::DESeqDataSet(tumor_myoblast_sce,
                                     # formula for grouping samples 
                                     design = ~ diagnosis_group)
```

If you look at the pseudo-bulked SCE object you should have only seen one assay, the `counts` assay.
This is because `DESeq2` expects raw counts.
When we run `DESeq2` on our dataset, raw counts will first be normalized using size factors to account for differences in total sample counts.

> Therefore we don't have to do any normalization on our own - we'll let `DESeq2` do all the work for us.

Reviewer 2: Another pedantic change to an em-dash
```suggestion
Therefore we don't have to do any normalization on our own – we'll let `DESeq2` do all the work for us.
```

# normalize and log transform to use for visualization
normalized_object <- DESeq2::rlog(deseq_object, blind = TRUE, fitType = 'local')
normalized_object
```

We now have a normalized and transformed object that can be directly input to the `DESeq2::plotPCA()` function, which will both calculate and plot the PC results.

```{r plotPCA}
DESeq2::plotPCA(normalized_object, intgroup = "diagnosis_group")
```

As expected we see that samples group together based on RMS subtype and are separated along the PC1 axis, the PC contributing the highest amount of variation.

We'll now use the wrapper function `DESeq()` to perform our differential expression analysis.
This function calculates normalization factors, estimates gene-wise dispersions, fits a negative binomial model and performs hypothesis testing using Wald statistics.

```{r deseq}
# run DESeq
# use the same fit type as with rlog 
deseq_object <- DESeq2::DESeq(deseq_object, fitType = "local")
```

We can evaluate how well the model fit our data by looking at the dispersion estimates.
We expect to see the dispersion estimates decrease as means are increasing and follow the line of best fit. 

> ```{r plot dipsersion}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{r plot dispersion}
```

## Differential Expression Analysis

Now we are ready to start preparing for our DE analysis, where we will compare the gene expression of tumor myoblast cells between ARMS and ERMS samples.

Throughout the notebook we have been working with an integrated dataset that contains corrected gene expression data and a corrected UMAP.

> However, we do not want to use corrected gene expression values for differential expression; we want to use the original raw counts that are present in the `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object. 

Reviewer 2: We don't want `logcounts` for DESeq. It does not expect or use normalized data. We also aren't going to use logcounts for any kind of pseudobulking...

> However, we do not want to use corrected gene expression values for differential expression; we want to use the original raw counts that are present in the `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object. 

Reviewer: This was not a clear comment from me and I meant to go back and change it, thanks for catching! I was trying to somehow communicate the difference between corrected and normalized since it felt odd to skip even talking about `logcounts` - including that we're not using it. Later I suggested to move a sentence up which is the better review!

Pseudo-bulking is implemented prior to differential expression analysis on single-cell data for the following reasons: 

- Produces larger and less sparse counts, which allows us to use standard normalization and differential expression methods used by bulk RNA-seq. 
- Collapses gene expression counts by sample, so that samples, rather than cells, represent replicates.
- Masks variance within a sample to emphasize variance across samples.
This can be both good and bad! 
Masking intra-sample variation means you might miss identifying genes that have high intra-sample heterogeneity.

Before we apply pseudo-bulking to our dataset, let's look at a simple example of how pseudo-bulking works. 

```{r create matrix}
# create an example counts matrix
counts_mtx <- matrix(
  1:12, 
  ncol = 4,
  dimnames = list(c("geneA", "geneB", "geneC"),
                  c("A-cell1", "A-cell2", "B-cell1", "B-cell2"))
)
counts_mtx
```

Next we will create a pseudo-bulked matrix, with only 2 columns, 1 for group A and 1 for group B.

> To do this we will use the `DelayedArray::colsum()` function that allows us to sum the counts in all columns.

Reviewer 2: It's confusing, but this actually sums counts for each row, across columns. This may be a question of how my brain works. 

Maybe: 

```suggestion
To do this we will use the `DelayedArray::colsum()` function, which allows us to sum the counts for each row across groups of columns.
```

# column names aren't automatically added to the pseudo-bulked sce, 
# so let's add them in 
colnames(pb_sce) <- glue::glue(
  "{pb_sce$celltype_broad}_{pb_sce$sample}"
)

pb_sce
```

How does the new pseudo-bulked `SingleCellExperiment` look different? 
How many columns does it have? 

Let's take a look at what the `colData` looks like in the pseudo-bulked SCE object. 

```{r pseudobulk colData}
# note the new addition of the column with number of cells per group 
head(colData(pb_sce))
```

You should see that columns such as `sum`, `detected`, `subsets_mito_sum`, and other columns that typically contain per cell QC statistics now contain `NA` rather than numeric values. 
This is because these values were initially calculated on a per cell level (we did this using `scuttle::addPerCellQCMetrics()`), but we no longer have a single column per cell, each column represents a group of cells, in this case cells of a specified cell type from an individual sample.
Therefore, the numbers that we calculated on a per cell level are no longer applicable to this pseudo-bulked SCE object.

You should also see a new column that wasn't present previously, the `ncells` column.

> This column was added during pseudo-bulking and indicates the total number of cells that were summed together to form each column of the SCE object.

Author: I moved it so that I first talk about the columns we've seen before, the QC columns and mention why they have NA. Then I talk about the new `ncells` column.

If there is variation in their gene expression patterns we would expect samples from each RMS subtype to separate in PC space, likely indicating presence of differentially expressed genes.
We can evaluate this by plotting PC1 and PC2.

In order to create our PCA plot, we will first need to normalize our data to account for any technical variations across samples.
As a reminder, this is NOT required for running `DESeq2` analysis, we are using it to visualize our data prior to DE analysis.

```{r normalize}
# estimate size factors first
deseq_object <- DESeq2::estimateSizeFactors(deseq_object)

# normalize and log transform to use for visualization
normalized_object <- DESeq2::rlog(deseq_object, blind = TRUE, fitType = 'local')
normalized_object
```

We now have a normalized and transformed object that can be directly input to the `DESeq2::plotPCA()` function, which will both calculate and plot the PC results.

```{r plotPCA}
DESeq2::plotPCA(normalized_object, intgroup = "diagnosis_group")
```

As expected we see that samples group together based on RMS subtype and are separated along the PC1 axis, the PC contributing the highest amount of variation.

> We'll now use the wrapper function `DESeq()` to perform our differential expression analysis.

Reviewer: I think "wrapper" could be too jargon-y. We use "convenience function" for SingleR, does that work here?

```suggestion
We'll now use the convenience function `DESeq()` to perform our differential expression analysis.
```

This function calculates normalization factors, estimates gene-wise dispersions, fits a negative binomial model and performs hypothesis testing using Wald statistics.

```{r deseq}
# run DESeq
# use the same fit type as with rlog 
deseq_object <- DESeq2::DESeq(deseq_object, fitType = "local")
```

We can evaluate how well the model fit our data by looking at the dispersion estimates.
We expect to see the dispersion estimates decrease as means are increasing and follow the line of best fit. 

```{r plot dispersion}

> plotDispEsts(deseq_object)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plotDispEstsplotDispEsts(deseq_object)
```

## Differential Expression Analysis

Now we are ready to start preparing for our DE analysis, where we will compare the gene expression of tumor myoblast cells between ARMS and ERMS samples.

Throughout the notebook we have been working with an integrated dataset that contains corrected gene expression data (`fastmnn_corrected` assay) and a corrected UMAP.
As a reminder, the uncorrected gene expression data, found in the `counts` and `logcounts` assays, correspond to data that has been merged (the first step we walked through prior to integration) into the same SCE but not yet integrated.
However, we do not want to use corrected gene expression values for differential expression; `DESeq2` expects the original raw counts as input so we will be using data found in the `counts` assay of the `SingleCellExperiment` object. 

> It is advised to only use the corrected values for any analyses being performed at the cell level, e.g. dimensionality reduction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is advised to only use the corrected values for any analyses being performed at the cell level, e.g., dimensionality reduction.
```

```

```{r pseudobulk matrix}
# create pseudo-bulked matrix, summing the counts for each gene across all cells in the specified group
pseudobulked_counts <- cbind(
  rowSums(counts_mtx[,c("A-cell1", "A-cell2")]), # sum all counts for cells labeled with group A
  rowSums(counts_mtx[,c("B-cell1", "B-cell2")]) # sum all counts for cells labeled with group B

> )

Reviewer: I support this idea, with an added comment that there is no base colsum (and also it's singular) so it's clear why we're using the function from this package.
That said, I have some memory that @jashapiro found some kind of bug or problem with this function? Did I make that up?

pseudobulked_counts 
```

Looking at this output you should see that the original 4 columns have been condensed to only 2 columns, 1 column to represent all cells from group `A` and 1 column to represent all cells from group `B`.

Now the actual pseudo-bulking for our dataset! 
We can pseudo-bulk using any grouping that we are interested in.
For right now, we are interested in looking at gene expression across cell types, so we want to group the pseudo-bulked counts matrix by both cell type and original sample. 

```{r pseudobulk sce}
# first subset the coldata to only have the columns we care about for pseudo-bulking 
pseudobulked_groups <- colData(rms_sce)[, c("celltype_broad", "sample")]

# create a new SCE object that contains the pseudo-bulked counts across the provided groups 
pseudobulked_sce <- scuttle::aggregateAcrossCells(rms_sce, 
                                                  id = pseudobulked_groups)

# column names aren't automatically added to the pseudo-bulked sce, so let's add them in 

> colnames(pseudobulked_sce) <- glue::glue("{pseudobulked_sce$celltype_broad}_{pseudobulked_sce$sample}")

Reviewer: I vote glue content next line for more glue!

```{r filter pseudobulk}
# remove any groups with less than 10 cells
filtered_pseudobulked_sce <- pseudobulked_sce[, pseudobulked_sce$ncells >= 10]
```

We can then take a look and see how many cell types we removed, if any.

```{r print dim}
# print out dimensions of unfiltered pseudobulk sce
dim(pseudobulked_sce)

# dimensions of filtered pseudobulk sce 
dim(filtered_pseudobulked_sce)
```

It looks like we only got rid of one group.

The last step we want to do to prepare our dataset for DE is to subset the pseudo-bulked SCE object to contain only the cell type that we are interested in comparing across the two RMS subtypes.
As mentioned previously, we want to are specifically interested in the `Tumor_Myoblast` cell type.

```{r filter celltype}
# create a new sce with only the tumor myoblasts
tumor_myoblast_sce <- filtered_pseudobulked_sce[, filtered_pseudobulked_sce$celltype_broad == "Tumor_Myoblast"]
```

After filtering for our cell type of interest we should have a dataset with 6 columns, 1 for each group of `Tumor_Myoblast` cells in each of our 6 samples.

### Perform differential expression with DESeq2

> Now we will use the `DESeq2` package to perform DE analysis on our pseudo-bulked SCE object.

Reviewer: +1

### Perform differential expression with DESeq2

Now we will use the `DESeq2` package to perform DE analysis on our pseudo-bulked SCE object.
From this point, we can proceed in the same way we would if we had a bulk RNA-seq dataset with 6 samples.
We will start with the unnormalized raw counts in the `counts` assay of the pseudo-bulked SCE and do the following with `DESeq2`:

- Create a `DESeq` object
- Normalize and log transform the counts data
- Estimate dispersions and shrink estimates
- Fit a negative binomial model and perform hypothesis testing using Wald statistics

#### Create the `DESeq2` Object

First we will create the `DESeq2` object.
To create the object we will need the unnormalized counts matrix, the metadata associated with the samples that will help tell `DESeq2` which sample belongs to which group, and the design formula. 
The design formula is used to indicate which columns of the metadata need to be considered in the DE comparison.
For our experiment we are comparing gene expression between different RMS subtypes, stored in the `diagnosis_group` column of the `colData` in the pseudo-bulked SCE.

```{r deseq object}

> # extract the metadata for each sample from sce as data.frame
> coldata_df <- as.data.frame(colData(tumor_myoblast_sce))
>   
> # set up the deseq object 
> deseq_object <- DESeq2::DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(counts(tumor_myoblast_sce),
>                                                # metadata from coldata 
>                                                colData = coldata_df,
>                                                # name of column to use for grouping samples 
>                                                design = ~ diagnosis_group)

Reviewer 2: We can actually simplify this, as we already have a summarized experiment (SCE is a SE)!
While this makes for a bit of an indirection, not having to convert the colData is a win in my book.

```suggestion
# set up the deseq object 
deseq_object <- DESeq2::DESeqDataSet(tumor_myoblast_sce,
                                     # formula for grouping samples 
                                     design = ~ diagnosis_group)
```

Reviewer: >  as we already have a summarized experiment (SCE is a SE)!

I'd make sure to emphasize this point too during this step to explain why we can jump right in

```

Before we can compare gene expression we will need to normalize the counts data.
If you look at the pseudo-bulked SCE object you should have only seen one assay, the `counts` assay.
This is because we took the unnormalized counts from the original SCE to create the new pseudo-bulked counts which then become the input to create the `DESeq2` object.

> We don't want to sum the normalized counts because those have each been normalized within their sample and do not account for differences between samples.

Reviewer 2: I would also say this is because you can't just sum logs... but I think this sentence may not be needed? It may be enough to just say that DESeq2 expects raw counts.

Reviewer: It may especially not be needed if we link the bulk materials somewhere.

When we run `DESeq2` on our dataset, raw counts will first be normalized using size factors to account for differences in total sample counts.

> Therefore we don't have to do any normalization on our own and we can let `DESeq2` do all the work for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore we don't have to do any normalization on our own - we'll let `DESeq2` do all the work for us.
```

However, we want to take a look at our data before we run the DE analysis.

> In particular, we can use principal component analysis (PCA) of our pseudo-bulked dataset as an initial test of our hypothesis that ARMS and ERMS samples have different gene expression patterns.

Reviewer: I'm a little unsure about calling this a test...maybe "exploration of our hypothesis"?

```suggestion
In particular, we can use principal component analysis (PCA) of our pseudo-bulked dataset as an initial exploration of our hypothesis that ARMS and ERMS samples have different gene expression patterns.
```

If there is variation in their gene expression patterns we would expect samples from each RMS subtype to separate in PC space.
We can evaluate this by plotting PC1 and PC2.

In order to create our PCA plot, we will first need to normalize our data to account for any technical variations across samples.

```{r normalize}

> # estimate size factors first

Reviewer: It feels odd to say that we don't have to normalize since DESeq takes care of it, but then we actually do normalize here. It seems like we always have to do size factors as well?
So, let's add more context about what functions we're running for DE specifically, and what we're running for exploratory viz.

To do this, we will use the `lfcShrink()` function, but first we need to know the name and/or position of the "coefficient" that was calculated by `DESeq()`, which we can do with the `resultsNames()` function.

```{r coefficient}
# identify position of coefficient
DESeq2::resultsNames(deseq_object)
```

```{r shrinkage}
# appyly logFC shrinkage using the default model
shrink_results <- DESeq2::lfcShrink(deseq_object, res = deseq_results, coef = 2, type = "apeglm")
head(shrink_results)
```

> If you look at our `shrink_results` object, we see that the genes are labeled with the ensembl gene identifiers, as those were the rownames of the pseudo-bulked SCE we used as input to build our `DESeq2` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you look at our `shrink_results` object, we see that the genes are labeled with the Ensembl gene identifiers, as those were the row names of the pseudo-bulked SCE we used as input to build our `DESeq2` object.
```

> Although some of us may have all of the identifiers memorized by heart, it can be useful to have a human readable symbol in our results.

Reviewer: 🎉

Before we save the results as a file, we will grab the gene symbols from the `rowData` of our original SCE object and add them as a new column.

```{r add gene symbol}

> # convert shrunken results to a data.frame and add ensembl id as a column

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we want to get into the difference between a tibble and a data.frame. But 
```suggestion
# convert shrunken results to a tibble and add Ensembl id as a column
```

deseq_results <- shrink_results |>
  tibble::as_tibble(rownames = "ensembl_id")

# convert rowdata to data.frame 
sce_rowdata_df <- rowData(tumor_myoblast_sce) |>
  # create a column with rownames stored as ensembl id to use for joining with deseq results
  tibble::as_tibble(rownames = "ensembl_id")

# combine deseq results with rowdata by ensembl id 
deseq_results <- deseq_results |>
  dplyr::left_join(sce_rowdata_df, by = "ensembl_id")

head(deseq_results)
```

> We can save the new `data.frame` that we have created with the ensembl identifiers, gene symbols, and the `DESeq2` results as a tab separated (`tsv`) file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can save the new `data.frame` that we have created with the Ensembl identifiers, gene symbols, and the `DESeq2` results as a tab separated (`tsv`) file.
```

Reviewer: I think I might remove `data.frame` --> "data frame" since this isn't referencing that function, just saying the noun "data frame."
Though there are so many kinds of data frames out there that there is a good argument for not doing that!

```{r save deseq}
# save our results as tsv
readr::write_tsv(deseq_results, deseq_output_file)
```

The last thing that we will do is take a look at how many genes are significant.

> Here we will want to use the adjusted p-value, found in the `padj` column of the results, as this p-value accounts for multiple test correction.

Reviewer 2: It isn't technically a p-value anymore, so let's not call it that exactly...
```suggestion
Here we will want to use the adjusted p-value, found in the `padj` column of the results, as this accounts for multiple test correction.
```

```{r}
# first look at the significant results 
deseq_results_sig <- deseq_results |>
  # filter based on adjusted pvalue
  dplyr::filter(padj <= 0.05)

head(deseq_results_sig)
```

### Exploring the identified differentially expressed genes 

Now that we have identified a set of genes that are DE in the tumor myoblasts between ARMS and ERMS subtypes, lets actually take a look at them and see if we can make some informative plots.
The first plot we'll make is a volcano plot using the [`EnhancedVolcano` package](https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano).

> This package automatically color codes the points by cutoffs for both significance and fold change and labels many of the significant genes (subject to spacing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This package automatically colors the points by cutoffs for both significance and fold change and labels many of the significant genes (subject to spacing).
```

> `EnhancedVolcano` has many, many options, which is a good thing if you don't like all of it's default settings.

Reviewer 2: Putting this comment here, because I can't figure out where else, but I feel like the "fun arrows" point the wrong way. Nothing to be done about it.

> `EnhancedVolcano` has many, many options, which is a good thing if you don't like all of it's default settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EnhancedVolcano` has many, many options, which is a good thing if you don't like all of its default settings.
```

> Even better, it outputs a `ggplot2` object, so if we want to customize it further, we can do that with the same `ggplot2` commands we have used before.

Reviewer: mixed antecedents here - 

```suggestion
Even better, it outputs a `ggplot2` object, so if we want to customize the plot further, we can use the same `ggplot2` commands we have used before.
```

To do this, we will use the `lfcShrink()` function, but first we need to know the name and/or position of the "coefficient" that was calculated by `DESeq()`, which we can do with the `resultsNames()` function.

```{r coefficient}
# identify position of coefficient
DESeq2::resultsNames(deseq_object)
```

```{r shrinkage}
# appyly logFC shrinkage using the default model

> shrink_results <- DESeq2::lfcShrink(deseq_object, res = deseq_results, coef = 2, type = "apeglm")

Reviewer: This could go to multi-line as needed for spacing - 
 
```suggestion
shrink_results <- DESeq2::lfcShrink(deseq_object, 
                                                             res = deseq_results, 
                                                             coef = 2, 
                                                             type = "apeglm")
```

Reviewer: Hm spacing isn't great over here in github, so you might want to let RStudio help!

head(shrink_results)
```

If you look at our `shrink_results` object, we see that the genes are labeled with the Ensembl gene identifiers, as those were the row names of the pseudo-bulked SCE we used as input to build our `DESeq2` object.
Although some of us may have all of the identifiers memorized by heart, it can be useful to have a human readable symbol in our results.
Before we save the results as a file, we will grab the gene symbols from the `rowData` of our original SCE object and add them as a new column.

```{r add gene symbol}
# convert shrunken results to a tibble and add Ensembl id as a column
deseq_results <- shrink_results |>

>   tibble::as_tibble(rownames = "ensembl_id")

Reviewer: We might actually spend a second here - why not use `as.data.frame()`? b/c with this function we can convert the rownames to a column on the fly.

# convert rowdata to data frame 
sce_rowdata_df <- rowData(tumor_myoblast_sce) |>
  # create a column with rownames stored as ensembl id to use for joining with deseq results
  tibble::as_tibble(rownames = "ensembl_id")

# combine deseq results with rowdata by ensembl id 
deseq_results <- deseq_results |>
  dplyr::left_join(sce_rowdata_df, by = "ensembl_id")

head(deseq_results)
```

We can save the new data frame that we have created with the Ensembl identifiers, gene symbols, and the `DESeq2` results as a tab separated (`tsv`) file.

```{r save deseq}
# save our results as tsv
readr::write_tsv(deseq_results, deseq_output_file)
```

The last thing that we will do is take a look at how many genes are significant.
Here we will want to use the adjusted p-value, found in the `padj` column of the results, as this accounts for multiple test correction.

```{r significant reults}
# first look at the significant results 
deseq_results_sig <- deseq_results |>
  # filter based on adjusted pvalue
  dplyr::filter(padj <= 0.05)

head(deseq_results_sig)
```

### Exploring the identified differentially expressed genes 

> Now that we have identified a set of genes that are DE in the tumor myoblasts between ARMS and ERMS subtypes, lets actually take a look at them and see if we can make some informative plots.

Reviewer: I don't really like the use of "DE" here since I feel like it stands for "differential expression" but here it's used as "differentially expressed." So, potentially, is this just me? If not..

```suggestion
Now that we have identified a set of genes that are differentially expressed in the tumor myoblasts between ARMS and ERMS subtypes, lets actually take a look at them and see if we can make some informative plots.
```

> The first plot we'll make is a volcano plot using the [`EnhancedVolcano` package](https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano).

Reviewer: I wonder if we should link bioc instead? If yes - 

```suggestion
The first plot we'll make is a volcano plot using the [`EnhancedVolcano` package](https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/3.16/bioc/html/EnhancedVolcano.html).
```

  theme(legend.position = "bottom")
```

We can also return back to the SCE object that we used to create our pseudo-bulked SCE and look at gene expression of some of the significant genes. 

> We can create UMAP plots as we did previously but instead of labeling each cell with metadata we can color each of the cells by the level of gene expression of a specified gene. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can create UMAP plots as we did previously, but instead of labeling each cell with metadata, we can color cells by a specified gene's expression levels.
```

We will also use some of the `ggplot2` skills we picked up earlier, like `facet_grid()` to plot cells from different RMS subtypes separately.
This can help us validate the `DESeq2` results so that we can visualize gene expression changes across our cell type of interest on a single-cell level. 

> ```{r}

Reviewer: chunk label

Reviewer 2: All chunks below this need labels, it seems.

# filter to just myoblast cells and remove any NA's before plotting
myoblast_combined_sce <- rms_sce[, which(rms_sce$celltype_broad == "Tumor_Myoblast")]

# plot PTPRT expression in ARMS vs. ERMS
scater::plotReducedDim(myoblast_combined_sce,
                       dimred = "fastmnn_UMAP",
                       colour_by = "ENSG00000196090", #PTPRT
                       point_size= 0.5,
                       point_alpha = 0.4,
                       other_fields = "diagnosis_group") +
  facet_grid(cols = vars(diagnosis_group))
```

In the above plot we only plotted the tumor myoblast cells that we used in our DE analysis. 

> However, we might be interested to see the expression of genes that are differentially expressed in tumor myoblasts in other cell types present in our samples.

Reviewer: I think you mean...

```suggestion
However, we might be interested to see the expression of genes that are differentially expressed in other cell types present in our samples.
```

```{r}

> # let's compare gene expression across some other cell types

Reviewer: any reason why these 4? Well, tumor is implicit, but why this specific normal tissue?

celltypes <- c("Tumor_Myoblast", "Tumor_Mesoderm", "Tumor_Myocyte", "Vascular Endothelium")

# subset to just tumor celltypes that we are interested in
tumor_sce <- rms_sce[, which(rms_sce$celltype_broad %in% celltypes)]
```

Next we will look at a few DE genes that we identified, one upregulated gene and one downregulated gene, and compare their expression in myoblasts to other cell types in ARMS and ERMS samples.
We will use the `scater::plotExpression()` function to create a violin plot with RMS subtype on the x-axis and gene expression on the y-axis.

> We can continue using our `facet_grid()` functionality and show each cell type in its own column of the plot grid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can continue using `facet_grid()` to show separate panels for each cell type.
```

Because we want to show multiple genes here, we are going to add an additional option to `facet_grid()` to include multiple rows in our plot grid, one for each gene of interest.

```{r}

> # pick a few genes to look at 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# pick a couple genes to look at 
```

genes_to_plot <- c("ENSG00000196090", #PTPRT
                   "ENSG00000148935") #GAS2

# create a violin plot 
scater::plotExpression(tumor_sce,

>                        features = genes_to_plot, # provide a vector of genes to plot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                       features = genes_to_plot, # a vector of genes to plot
```

                       x = "diagnosis_group", 
                       colour_by = "diagnosis_group",
                       other_fields = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size = 0.1) +
  facet_grid(cols = vars(celltype_broad), # each celltype is its own column
             rows = vars(Feature)) + # each feature is its own row
  theme(strip.text = element_text(size = 7)) + # change the font size of the facet labels

>   guides(colour = guide_legend(override.aes = list(size = 3, alpha = 1))) # change the size of the legend colors

Reviewer 2: As long as we are getting into it, do we want to update the legend title?
```suggestion
  guides(colour = guide_legend(
      title = "Subtype", # update the legend title
     override.aes = list(size = 3, alpha = 1)) # change the size of the legend colors
 ) 
```

Reviewer: Noting that the long comments here might be too long, so we might move them to above the lines instead of at the end.

```

How do the expression of these genes change across cell types and RMS subtypes?

Go ahead and explore some genes on your own! 
Feel free to plot any of the genes that are identified as significant, found in the DE results table, or your favorite gene.

> Remember, you need to use the ensembl gene identifier to refer to each gene.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember, you need to use the Ensembl gene identifier to refer to each gene.
```

# let's compare gene expression across some other cell types
# look at all tumor cells and pick one normal cell type
celltypes <- c("Tumor_Myoblast", 
               "Tumor_Mesoderm", 
               "Tumor_Myocyte", 
               "Vascular Endothelium")

# subset to just tumor celltypes that we are interested in
tumor_sce <- rms_sce[, which(rms_sce$celltype_broad %in% celltypes)]
```

Next we will look at a few DE genes that we identified, one up regulated gene and one down regulated gene, and compare their expression in myoblasts to other cell types in ARMS and ERMS samples.
We will use the `scater::plotExpression()` function to create a violin plot with RMS subtype on the x-axis and gene expression on the y-axis.
We can continue using `facet_grid()` to show separate panels for each cell type.
Because we want to show multiple genes here, we are going to add an additional option to `facet_grid()` to include multiple rows in our plot grid, one for each gene of interest.

```{r multi-gene plot}
# pick a couple genes to look at 
genes_to_plot <- c("ENSG00000196090", #PTPRT
                   "ENSG00000148935") #GAS2

# create a violin plot 
scater::plotExpression(tumor_sce,

>                        features = genes_to_plot, # a vector of genes to plot

Reviewer: This may run into spacing issues. If so, 
```suggestion
                       # a vector of genes to plot
                       features = genes_to_plot, 
```

                       x = "diagnosis_group", 
                       colour_by = "diagnosis_group",
                       other_fields = "celltype_broad",
                       point_size = 0.1) +
  facet_grid(cols = vars(celltype_broad), # each celltype is its own column

>              rows = vars(Feature)) + # each feature is its own row

Reviewer: `scater::plotExpression()` actually creates this `Feature` column. We should explain this! Also this is why it doesn't have to be in the `other_fields` list.
